the islands have become a playground for
visitors but it's all of us were paying
the price
one of my best places my favorite place
is when I was growing up to go camping
is there's now a huge hotel right on the
property we've developed our coastline
so much that we no longer have access to
the simple things in life that kept us
happy
follow someplace paradise and kiss it
goodbye seemed all over the world it's
easy to think that all these problems
are someone else's fault but I think
whether you were born here or whether
you're here for just two weeks everyone
has a role to play in making things
right
the ancestors had a principle which I
think could help steer us back on course
the word kuleana means privilege and
responsibility it's that double edged
sword if you have the privilege of
enjoying something you also have the
responsibility to to protect it as a
teacher I believe it's my kuleana my
responsibility to encourage people to
act more like the Hawaiians of old and
take better care of these islands the
key is to work on this next generation
right here and create a whole new army
of environmental thinkers well the first
step is to get them off the couch my
school is part of Hawaiian canoe club
outrigger paddling is not only
culturally significant but also a lot of
fun and a great way to get kids to start
seeing the world as the ancients did
he's a refrigerator use your playground
is your gym is your church is everything
to you the ocean is our life as
Hawaiians they're better in a race
when you get kids out onto the open
ocean they have to work together and
they have to understand better the
rhythms of the ocean how small they are
and how precarious our existence is it
makes them realize that there's more or
less than tvs and mp3 players
the more you get kids out there the more
they ask questions they see stuff that
doesn't belong and they want to know who
put this plastic bag in the water
how come it's brown today not so blue
they want to know who's polluting their
environment
you can sit in a classroom all day and
try to teach kids about preserving the
ecology and the environment but it takes
a few hours to get them out there and
have them witness something that will
change your life forever